%Objectification of feedback based trust evaluation considering social relationship in sharing economy

The definition of trust is a measure of confidence that an entity will work in an expected way from the perspective of trustor[7].
Mayer et al.[8] define the trust with factors as integrity,
	benevolence,
	and ability.
Integrity means honesty of peer participated in trust relationship,
	benevolence means the willingness of cooperation between peers in trust relationship,
	and ability implies the capacity for fulfilling requested action between peers in trust relationship.

These factors are important to analyze trust in detail.

Traditional studies on trust evaluation can be separated to three categories: Policy-based,
	reputation-based,
	and socialbased trust[9].
The policy-based methods evaluate the trust value whether the credentials of trustee match up to the policy which ruled by the trustor or not.
Reputation-based approaches evaluate the peer’s trust using a system which aggregate the feedback of peers about their opponent’s integrity,
	benevolence,
	and ability[9].
Feedback based reputation evaluation is the most popular method to assess the trustworthiness of peers in e-commerce services.
Paul et al.[10] studied the trust among peers in Ebay[11],
	which is one of the famous e-commerce service.
They investigate the ability of a peer (e.g. the discount rate,
	fast shipping) and the integrity of a peer (e.g. the quality of a product,
	etc.) Mehmet et al.[12] studied the patterns of participation and exchange in Airbnb.
In detail,
	they investigated how income,
	race,
	and education affect the economic activity on Airbnb and found that the education is a heavily influential factor.

The social trust utilizes the social relationship to evaluate the trustee’s benevolence,
	integrity,
	and ability from the trustor’s point of view.
The social trust is divided into the explicit social trust and implicit social trust[13].
The explicit social trust comes from the social network topology,
	such as the graph similarity between peers,
	the number of friends,
	and betweenness centrality,
	etc.[14] For example,
	a peer who has many friends can be estimated to have more benevolence and integrity than other peers.
Moreover,
	peers trust their friends[15],
	that is,
	peers estimate the integrity of their friends higher than others.
The implicit social network is measured by checking the communication history[16].
Peers,
	who do not connect to each other in online social network,
	also can generate the social relationship.
If they interact with each other through messengers or e-mail,
	then they have implicit social trust.
The frequency and the duration of the communication affect to the implicit social trust.

As the social group engaged in the P2P resource sharing community directly or indirectly,
	the feedback-based trust,
	which is usually utilized on P2P resource sharing services,
	has been biased because a rating point as a feedback of sharing services includes not only the trust related to sharing services itself but also subjective social trust.
Therefore,
	in this paper,
	we propose the objectification of feedback-based trust by getting rid of social trust from the rating point.

%%%%%%

2.3.1
Marsh The work of Marsh [107] is said to be the first work on trust in computer science.
Marsh concentrates on modeling trust between only two agents.
Thus,
	the trust management does not treat the collection of recommendations provided by other entities.
This model identifies knowledge,
	utility,
	importance,
	risk,
	and perceived competence as important aspects related to trust.
The model defines three types of trust: dispositional trust,
	the trust of an entity independent from the possible cooperation partner and the situation; general trust,
	the trust of an entity in another one,
	independently of the specific situation; and situational trust,
	which describes the trust of an entity in another one in a specific situation or context.

2.3.2
Fortune’s Most Admired Companies List The Fortune’s Most Admired Companies List (MAC List) [108] surveys CEOs and financial analysts about their view of listed companies in terms of issues such as financial soundness,
	innovation,
	use of corporate assets and social responsibility.
The list is developed by the Fortune’s editorial panel in discussion with business leaders and financial analysts and try to identify features that executives and financial experts admire in companies.

2.3.3
Castelfranchi and Falcone The model proposed by Castelfranchi and Falcone [109] was a forefather of cognitive trust models,
	and it is the base of later models in literature.
They claim that trust is the mental background of delegation.
Thus,
	trust becomes a mental state that yields one entity to delegate a task to other.
This concept of trust is based on a number of basic beliefs: competence belief (the other entity can actually do the task),
	dependence belief (the other entity is necessary or a better choice to perform the task),
	willingness belief (the other entity is supposed to be willing to do the task),
	and persistence belief (the other entity is stable on its intentions of performing the task).

2.3.4
Sporas In this model [110],
	only the most recent rating between two entities is considered.
Besides,
	entities with very high reputation values experience much smaller reputation changes after each update than entities with a low reputation.
Sporas incorporates a measure of the reliability of the entities’ reputation based on the standard deviation of reputation values.
It is robust to changes in the behavior of an entity and the reliability measure improves the usability of the reputation value.

2.3.5
Histos Histos [110] was designed as a response to the lack of personalization that Sporas reputation values have.
The model can deal with direct information and witness information.
In this case,
	the reputation value is a subjective property assigned particularly by each individual (actually becoming a trust value).
The treatment of direct interaction in this reputation model is limited to the use of the most recent experience with the agent that is being evaluated.
The strength of the model relies on its use of witness information.
Ratings are represented as a directed graph.
The reputation of an agent at level n of the graph (with n > 0) is calculated recursively as a weighted mean of the rating values that entities in level X − 1 gave to that entity.
A drawback of this model is the use of the reputation value assigned to a witness also as a measure of its reliability.

2.3.6
Abdul-Rahman and Hailes The trust model presented by Abdul-Rahman and Hailes [111] is focused on virtual communities related to e-commerce and artificial autonomous agents.
The model defines direct trust and recommender trust.
Direct trust is the trust of an entity in another one based on direct experience,
	whereas recommender trust is the trust of an entity in the ability of providing good recommendations.
Trust can only have discrete labeled values,
	namely Very Trustworthy,
	Trustworthy,
	Untrustworthy,
	and,
	Very Untrustworthy for direct trust,
	and Very good,
	good,
	bad and,
	very bad for recommender trust.
The difference between two ratings from different entities can be computed as semantic distance.
This semantic distance can be used to adjust further recommendations.
The combination of ratings is done as a weighted sum,
	where the weights depend on the recommender trust.

2.3.7
Schillo et al.
This trust model [112] is oriented to scenarios where the result of an interaction between two entities is good or bad.
This value is a subjective property assigned particularly by each individual and it does not depend on the context.
It is based on Prisoner’s dilemma set of games [42] with a partner selection phase.
Each agent receives the results of the game it has played plus the information about the games played by a subset of all players (its neighbors).
The model is based on probability theory that uses the number of times that the target entity was honest.
Besides,
	an entity can get information from other agents that it has met before.
The answer of witnesses to a query is the set of observed experiences,
	and not a summary of them.
The model assumes that witnesses never lie but that can hide (positive) information in order to make other agents appear less trustworthy.

2.3.8
Yu and Singh The TRS model proposed by Yu and Singh [113] uses two information sources.
The first one contains the entity’s belief built as a result of its direct interaction with other entities.
The second one includes the testimonies of third-parties that can be beneficial in the absence of local ratings.
The model propose a trust network which tries to locate the most appropriate witnesses in a multi-agent system.
When a requesting entity wants to evaluate the trustworthiness of other entity ,
	it sends a query to the neighbors of that entity asking for their perception regarding the target entity.
This model deals with malicious entities who deliberately disseminate misinformation through network.


2.3.9
REGRET REGRET [114] is a decentralized TRS designed for complex e-commerce environments where various types of entities with different social relationships play important roles.
It describes the social structure and relationships of the system through the ideas of cooperation,
	competition,
	and trade.
REGRET is based on a three-dimensional reputation model: Individual dimension or subjective reputation which calculates trust based on the direct impressions of an entity; social dimension,
	which is divided into three types of reputation: witness reputation,
	neighborhood reputation,
	and system reputation; and ontological dimension,
	which adds the possibility of combining different aspects of reputation to calculate a complex one.
With the help of the ontological structure,
	each entity is capable of determining the overall reputation of a particular entity by assigning the appropriate influence degree to each aspect related with its demand.
In addition to the reputation value,
	REGRET gives a reliability measurement which reflects the confidence level of the produced reputation value.

2.3.10
Aberer and Despotovic The model proposed by Aberer and Despotovic [115] is one of the first TMS focused on P2P networks.
It is based on the complaints a peer receives from other peers in the network.
Although it improves network performance in stable environments,
	due to the naive of its approach,
	it is highly sensitive to malicious peers.
However,
	it served as baseline to subsequent models in this area of application.

2.3.11
Esfandiary and Chandrasekharan The model proposed by Esfandiary and Chandrasekharan [116] uses to sources of information: observation and interaction.
The processing of observed information is based on Bayesian learning.
The interaction is based on two main protocols: an exploratory protocol and a query protocol.
In the exploratory protocol,
	entities ask the other entities about known topics to evaluate their degree of trust.
Answers consistent with their knowledge yield to consider an entity as trusted.
In the query protocol,
	entities ask for advice to previously trusted entities.
The authors claim that the calculation of this trust interval is equivalent to the problem of routing in a communication network and,
	therefore,
	known distributed algorithms used to solve that problem can be successfully applied to this situation.

2.3.12
Afras The main characteristic of this model [117] is the use of fuzzy sets to represent reputation values.
Once a new fuzzy set that shows the degree of satisfaction of the latest interaction with a given entity is calculated,
	the old reputation value and the new satisfaction value are aggregated using a weighted aggregation.
Besides,
	the weights of this aggregation are calculated from a single value that they call remembrance or memory.
Recommendations from other entities are aggregated directly with the direct experiences.
If they come from a recommender with a high reputation,
	they have the same degree of reliability as a direct experience.

2.3.13
Azzedin and Maheswaran Azzedin and Maheswaran [118] propose a TMS based on a combination of direct trust and reputation by weighting the two components differently.
It gives more weight to the direct trust.
This direct trust o trust level is calculated based on past experiences and is given for a specific context.
Calculation of reputation values is based on a neural network approach.

2.3.14
Carter et al.
Carter et al. propose a complex but novel TMS [119] based on the concept of roles.
They claim that the reputation of an agent is based on the degree of fulfillment of roles ascribed to it by the society.
Therefore,
	if society judges that an entity has met its roles,
	it will be rated with a positive reputation.
They define five main roles: social information provider,
	interactivity role,
	content provider,
	administrative feedback,
	and longevity role.
All of them oriented to promote a informationsharing society.
Finally,
	the entity’s overall reputation is calculated as a weighted aggregation of the degree of fulfillment of each role.
These weights are dependent on the specific society,
	and the society has a centralized mechanism that calculate and disseminate these reputation values,
	and monitors the society.

2.3.15
SECURE The trust model and trust management in the SECURE project [120] aims to transfer a human notion of trust to ubiquitous computing.
The main aspect of the trust model is the distinction between unknown and untrustworthy.
An entity b is unknown to an entity a,
	if a cannot collect any information about b.
Whereas b is untrusted if a has information,
	based on direct interaction or recommendations,
	stating that b is an untrustworthy entity.
The trust propagation is based on policies.
These policies allow entities to explicitly express whose recommendations are considered in a trust decision.
And finally,
	the decision making is threshold based.

2.3.16
Wang and Vassileva Wang and Vassileva [121] proposed a trust model using Bayesian networks based on the quality of services provided by entities.
The entities manage two different values of trust in another entities: competence in providing services,
	and reliability in providing recommendations about other entities.
The model uses binary events to qualify transactions (successful or unsuccessful transactions) between entities.
Trust is modelled based on this transactions and it used to weight the direct and indirect information: the entity will discard the recommendations from the untrustworthy sources but will combine the recommendations from the trustworthy and unknown sources.


2.3.17
XenoTrust XenoTrust is a TMS proposed by Dragovic [122].
It describes a novel approach to TMS because it is an event-based distributed trust management system.
This event-based paradigm allows to reduce communication overheads and can simplify,
	and even enable,
	the use of TMS in systems with tight communication limitations.
XenoTrust uses some performance criteria (i.e.,reliability,
	honesty and throughput) to calculate the trust values assigned to other entities in the system.

2.3.18
Shand et al.
Shand et al. propose a TMS to facilitate secure collaboration in pervasive computer systems [123].
This is one of the first TMS that tries to overcome the performance of the policy-based trust models.
When applying policy-based TMS to very dynamic systems the policies are too strict to efficiently handle topology changing networks,
	nodes entering and exiting from the system,
	etc.
This model is based on the existence of some generic-policies and some local or nodespecific policies that are combined in order to calculate trust values.


2.3.19
Reputation Quotient The Reputation Quotient [48],
	[49] tries to obtain data on a company’s reputation from the point of view of the general public,
	customers,
	employees,
	suppliers and investors.
The model measures perceptions of an organization in terms of social expectations of dimensions such as products and services,
	vision and leadership,
	work place environment and social responsibility.

2.3.20
FIRE In the FIRE model [124],
	trust is evaluated based on a different number of information sources: Interaction Trust (IT),
	that is built from the self experience of an entity with the other entities; Witness Reputation (WR) that is based on the direct observation of an entity’s behavior by some third-party agent; Certified Reputation (CR),
	one of the novelties in the FIRE model,
	that consists of certified references disclosed by third-party agents; and Role-based Trust (RT),
	which models the trust across predefined role-based relationships between two entities.
The significance of each component in the trust calculation algorithm is adjusted according to changes in the environment.
Each component owns a trust algorithm with relevant rating weight function to determine the quality of ratings tailored to its responsibility.
Thus,
	the weight algorithm for IT in based on the age of ratings whereas WR and CR have to take the credibility of rating into account as well.
Credibility is based on a filtering mechanism that identifies inaccurate reports and penalizes misbehaving entities.

2.3.21
PeerTrust PeerTrust is a trust model [125] with specific characteristics for peer-to-peer e-commerce communities.
It uses several factors to calculate the reputation values of the entities (peers): feedback which is a judgment of other peers regarding target peer; feedback scope,
	such as the amount of transactions the peer experienced with others; a credibility factor to evaluate the honesty of feedback sources; transaction context factor such as time and size of transactions; and community context factor.
This model proposes an innovative composite trust metric that incorporates the described parameters to enhance accuracy and reliability of predicted trustworthiness.

2.3.22
Corporate Personality Scale The Corporate Personality Scale [51] surveys customers and employees in terms of their perceptions of organization’s personality,
	focusing on dimensions such as agreeableness,
	competence and enterprise.

2.3.23
SPIRIT The SPIRIT model [126] can be applied to survey Corporate Reputation from the perspective of customers,
	employees,
	suppliers,
	investors and community groups.
It measures Corporate Reputation in terms of the experience,
	feelings and intentions of stakeholders towards a business.

2.3.24
TIBFIT The model was proposed by Krasniewski and Varadharajan [127].
TIBFIT is a trust scheme implemented in the form of a communication protocol.
It is designed to detect node failures in event-driven WSN.
This detection is based on the analysis of binary reports from nodes close to any event in the system.
If TIBFIT detects a node failure,
	it masks any communication related to this node.
Additionally it can communicate this failure.
Therefore,
	the system as a whole can try to take actions to deal with this situation.

2.3.25
UniTEC UniTEC is the TMS proposed by Kinateder at al. [103].
This model is focused on experience as base of trust values.
It uses direct and indirect information and performs direct and indirect trust values updates separately.
UniTEC gives more weight to the recent experience than to the old one,
	and previously calculated trust values are expressed as a binary metric (good or bad experiences).
Thus,
	as a side-effect,
	the storage of old experience requires less resources than the new ones.

2.3.26
TRAVOS The TRAVOS (Trust and Reputation model for Agent-based Virtual Organizations) system [128] is developed to ensure high-quality interaction between the entities of a large open system.
It uses two information sources to calculate the reputation of the entities: Direct Interaction and Witness Observation.
However,
	this model relies greatly on its direct experiences and refuses to combine others’ opinions unless they are really required.
For this purpose,
	it provides a confidence metric to determine whether the direct experiences are sufficient to make an acceptable review to a particular entity or not.
If not,
	it disseminates queries to obtain additional observations from other witnesses who claim to have had previous interaction with that certain entity.

2.3.27
Crosby and Pissinou Crosby and Pissinou proposed a mechanism for the election of cluster heads in WSN based on a distributed trust-base framework [129].
It is based on the use of direct and indirect information coming from previously trusted nodes.
Trust is modelled using a feature extraction and weighting mechanism of some essential parameters from the communication protocol: packet drop rate,
	data packets and control packets.
Each node stores a local trust table for all its neighbor nodes.
Cluster nodes can ask for these tables.
Therefore,
	they can update their reputation values over other cluster head nodes to improve their routing path policies.

2.3.28
BambooTrust Proposed by Kotsovinos [130],
	BabooTrust is based on XenoTrust.
It is focused on global public computing platforms such as grid computing systems and it is built as a P2P system.
It is a model with a high-performance regarding the distribution of trust information throughout the system.
It implements as Bamboo hash table in order to facilitate the performance,
	scalability,
	efficiency,
	and load-balancing of the whole system.

2.3.29
TidalTrust This trust model proposed by Golbeck [131] is based on ten discrete trust values in the interval [1, 10].
This model is based on the idea that humans are better in rating on a discrete scale than on a continuous one and the 10 discrete trust values should be enough to approximate continuous trust values.
Besides,
	recursive trust or rating propagation allows to infer the rating of subjects by the ratings provided by other entities.
Since each entity aggregates its collected ratings and passes only a single value to its ancestor in the recursion,
	the source cannot evaluate which nodes provided their rating.

2.3.30
Bayesian Reputation System Bayesian Reputation System (BRS) was proposed by Jøsang et al [132].
It supports both binomial and multinomial rating models to allow rating supply happening in different levels.
Mathematically,
	multinomial BRS is based on computing reputation scores by statistically updating the Dirichlet Probability Density Function (PDF) [133],
	[134].
In this context,
	entities are allowed to rate other entities within any level from a set of predefined ratings levels.
In contrast,
	in binomial BRS which is based on Beta Distribution,
	the agents can only provide binary ratings for the others.
Both systems use the same principle to compute the expected reputation scores: combining previous interaction records with new ratings.
Besides,
	in order to deal with dynamism in the participant’s behavior,
	BRS provides a longevity factor which determines the expiry time of the old ratings and gives greater weight to more recent ones.

2.3.31
Reputation-based Framework for High Integrity Sensor Networks RFSN was proposed by Ganeriwal and Srivastava [135].
It classifies the actions as cooperative and non-cooperative.
It uses direct and indirect information,
	and the behavior of the node is decided upon a global threshold.
If the trust value is below this threshold the node in considered a non-cooperative node,
	and any contact from the rest of the network nodes is avoided.
The network propagates only positive reputation information in order to avoid some WSN specific attacks such as bad-mouthing attacks.
Finally,
	an aging factor in introduced to give more weight to recent interactions.

2.3.32
Distributed Reputation-based Beacon Trust System This model was presented by Srinivasan and Teitelbaum [136] It is focus on keep the network performance through detecting malicious beacon nodes.
Each beacon node monitors and provides information about malfunction behaviors of beacons that are one hope from them.
Therefore,
	nodes can choose to trust in a specific beacon based on this information.
They use a voting approach to calculate this trust value.
The voting process is based on the reputation tables of each node,
	that are generated by processing the reputation tables of the close beacon nodes.

2.3.33
Subjective Logic This trust model presented by Jøsang [137] combines elements of Bayesian probability theory with belief theory.
Besides,
	related to belief theory,
	trust is represented by opinions which can be used to express the subjective probability that an entity will behave as expected in the next interaction.




Trust based on knowledge, utility, importance, risk, and perceived competence. Types of trust: dispositional, general, situational

Output performance as source of reputation. Global dissemination process

Cognitive trust calculation process. Trust based on beliefs

Short-term trust Hysteresis Trust

Direct and witness information

Direct trust and recommender trust Trust as discrete value Aggregated trust values

Bipolar trust Trustworthiness based. Independent on the context

Direct and on-demand witness information. Countermeasures against misinformation attacks

Complex trust sources: direct, witness, reasoning Introduction of mixed trust and reputation systems

Trust in P2P networks. Negative trust model

%Direct and indirect information. Q&A challenges Trust calculation based on distributed routing algorithms

Trust formulation: fuzzy values Direct observation plus communicated trust Quantification of memory

Reputation as source of trust information. Context based

Categorization: role-based reputation. Roles are society dependent. Calculation based on society principles.

Concept of unknown’ ’ and untrustwhortiness Calculation and dissemination based on filters, and thresholds

Explicit difference between confidence for actions and reliability for communication Performance

capabilities (reliability, honesty and throughput) as source of trust Event-based model

Improved policy-based system

Ratings from internal members of an organization as sources of reputation

Direct, witness, certified reputation, role-based trust. Introduction of categorization Trust algorithm as weight function

Feedback based: information, scope, credibility, transaction, and community

Combination of internal and external opinions as source of reputation

Experiences and feelings as source of organizational reputation

Trust integrated in a communication protocol Auto-filtering of malfunctioning nodes

Focused on experience. Simplification of memories

Focused on subjective trust. Witness as fine tuning Minimum amount of information required to calculate valid trust values

Introduction of local trust-tables Feature extraction from low level features of the underlying system

Highly efficient and scalable trust dissemination process

Trust as discrete values. Trust transitivity based on weighting

Dirichlet Probability Density and Beta Distribution Longevity factor.

Direct and indirect information. Global threshold Only positive information is propagated

Local reputation based on voting over second-hand information

Combination of belief theory and Bayesian Reputation systems







